Day 1: Introduction Transcript
Introduction to Precision Nutrition Coaching
Back to Video Lesson
Welcome to the PN 5-Day Exercise and Sport Nutrition Coaching course.
Over the next few days we’re going to cover several important lessons, lessons designed to help you become a better fitness professional.
Using real client stories and well-controlled data, I’ll be laying out some critical nutrition strategies that you can put to use immediately to take your coaching game to the next level.
So, without further ado, let’s get into today’s lesson.
In today’s lesson I’d like to set the stage for this course. You see, during the next few days we’ll be talking a lot about the nutrition side of coaching.
And before getting into that, I’d like you to understand why nutrition is such an important part of the coaching process.
Let me put this bluntly: exercise alone doesn’t really work all that well. Especially when looking at body composition related outcomes, like fat loss, for example – far and away the most important outcome your clients are asking for help with.
Now, this isn’t just something I’m throwing out there.
Several recent studies, including one done at the University of Texas and another done at the University of Oklahoma, have shown pretty conclusively that in the absence of a sound nutrition intervention, exercise produces pretty disappointing results.
Let’s take a look at the data.
In this first investigation, done at the University of Texas, two sedentary groups of people were studied. The first group of 50 was considered the control group. And they simply remained sedentary for the entire 12-week study.
The second group of 50 was considered the exercise group. And this group worked with a trainer to perform 3 strength and 2 interval training sessions per week – about 5 total hours of exercise.
Both groups were instructed to keep their diets the same. And data analysis showed that at the beginning and at the end of the study, their diets hadn’t changed at all.
What did the researchers find?
Well, although the exercise group did lose statistically more fat than the control group, the total amount of fat lost in the exercise group was a mere 1.5lbs!
So, in this study, if these 50 people would have hired personal trainers, they would have spent about 60 hours and 3-4 thousand dollars to lose a mere 1.5lbs of fat. That’s not good.
Now let’s look at the Oklahoma study.
In this investigation, two additional groups were studied. The first group of 10 was considered the control group. And they simply remained sedentary for the 10 week study.
The second group of 14 was considered the exercise group. And this group worked with a trainer to perform 2 strength and 3 steady state cardio training sessions per week – about 5 total hours of exercise.
Both groups were instructed to keep their diets the same. And data analysis showed that at the beginning and at the end of the study, their diets hadn’t changed at all.
What did the researchers find here?
Well, although the exercise group did lose statistically more fat than the control group, the total amount of fat lost in the exercise group was just 1.5lbs – same as the Texas study.
So, in this study, just like the last, these 14 people would have hired personal trainers, they would have spent about 50 hours and 3-4 thousand dollars to lose just 1.5lbs of fat.
I could go on all day citing research showing that exercise alone – without a nutrition intervention – isn’t all that effective at helping your client achieve the #1 goal they’re after.
But I think you get the picture.
So, with all the data out there showing just how important nutrition is, within the context of body transformation, why aren’t more fitness professionals including nutrition in their practice?
Well, my guess is that they just don’t know how.
Either they don’t feel confident in the science of exercise nutrition – which includes advanced topics like cellular function, digestion and absorption, energy transfer, macronutrient biochemistry, and more.
Or they don’t feel confident in the practice of exercise nutrition – in other words they’re just not sure how to systematically deliver client-centered nutrition advice in a way that clients will actually respond positively to. And, in turn, comply with.
You see, I’ve traveled all over the world meeting with and providing coaching services for fitness professionals. And, far and away, the number 1 complaint I hear with respect to giving nutrition advice is this:
I’m always harping on the importance of nutrition with my clients. But they just never listen.
Now, if you find yourself saying the same things, I’ve gotta be honest with you. It’s not your clients that are the problem. It’s your system.
And, if you want to really set yourself apart – if you want to be known as the one person who gets results – you need to improve that system.
So, over the next few days, I’m going to help you do just that. I'm going to teach you a new system.
Step by step, I’ll show you exactly how my team and I have been able to produce outstanding, well-measured results in the 3,000 clients we’ve worked with in the last 2 years alone.
What kind of results am I talking about?
Well, on average, these 3,000 clients have each lost 15lbs of body fat in 6 months. That’s 500 percent better than seen in the university studies above. And the coolest part is that top performers are losing as much as 50lbs of body fat in 6 months.
Beyond this, another statistic we’re very proud of is compliance. Among these 3,000 clients, we’ve seen an average of 70-75% compliance in nutrition and exercise habits.
Think about that, around 75% of the time our clients are doing exactly what we ask them to do nutritionally. All without us ever seeing them in person. Try to find a better rate of compliance anywhere.
So again, stay tuned and over the next few days I’m going to outline a better nutrition coaching system. One based not on some theoretical model of nutrition coaching. But one based on real research and real world results, field tested daily with our own clients. And one that you can apply immediately to improve your own coaching services.
The system can be broken down into 4 simple steps.
Step 1: Assess
In Step 1, I’ll show you how to best prepare for your clients using the right questionnaires and assessments. These tools will help you determine exactly who they are, where they’re coming from, and how you can best help them starting on day 1. You’ll be poised, from the very first session, to put your clients in the best position for success.
Step 2: Advise
In Step 2, I'll show you how to plan your clients nutrition strategies based on the assessments you did in Step 1. If you use those assessments correctly, you’ll know exactly what their needs are -- and you'll be able to tailor your advice specifically to them. No more lost clients because your advice was either too basic or too advanced for where they were at.
Step 3: Measure
Once a client gets his or her marching orders, we’ll teach you how to set outcome and behavior goals. This is pretty tricky for most fitness pros so let us walk you through the process. Then, once the goals are set, we’ll teach you how to measure whether or not your advice is working. This is a critical step in the process that must not be avoided.
Step 4: Adjust
If a client is moving in the right direction, you’ll know it from the measurements you collected in Step 3. If they’re not moving in the right direction, or their goals have changed, it’s time to make some adjustments. And in this step we’ll cover when and how to adjust a client’s program to avoid the dreaded plateau.
So there you have it, 4 critical steps, each taken from our work with our own clients, each to be covered over the next 4 days. Tomorrow? Lesson 1: Assess.
See you then.